---
title: "On Doomscrolling"
draft: false
date: 2025-07-25T09:16:45.000Z
description: "My thoughts on doomscrolling and consumption culture"
# categories:
#   - Hello
---

Doomscrolling. I've done my fair share of it, and I will continue to do so. I'm starting to wonder if it's innate to human nature, or if there's something we can do as a society to fix it. While doomscrolling, I came across this David Foster Wallace [clip](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/uks5oiojVjY) predicting doomscrolling starting with TV and the invention of the remote. Obviously, it's even easier to do now which makes it more addictive. In the future, maybe we will just be able to use our brain to scroll, and maybe we won't even have a physical device. Maybe it's just embedded into our visual cortex. What happens then? 

People have tried to limit social media use through many ways. Limiting screen time and quitting entirely are the most popular approaches. We think we can just compeletely unplug from society, and we think that we can place limits on our screne time by CONTROLLING our usage with technology [itself](https://support.apple.com/guide/iphone/set-schedules-with-screen-time-iphb0c7313c9/ios)? I'm not sure about that.

Is this really just an individual's battle? Is it just up to us to solve this on our own? Like eating a healthy diet, it's an indivual's job to control what we consume on the internet? The real world uses cheap and addictive chemicals in our foods to make it harder to maintain a healthy diet. Similarly, psychologists have spent years figuring out what makes us tick to make us stuck on our screens. We are all fighting an unfair battle, and we need to beat them to survive. [Negativity Bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negativity_bias) in the news and [Variable Rewards](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Variable_reward) make it nearly impossible. The most ironic part of it all is that we know exactly what we are up against, and we still can't seem to win. Some of us are be able to fight it, while others simply can't. Should we expect everyone to have an extroardinary amount of self-discipline? Because if that's the case, there's only a few percent of us that can win. Maybe it's self selection. Maybe it's Darwinian evolution. The people who can't adapt will get left behind.

What if we framed this as a societal issue? That spending all of this time scrolling and consuming can actually be solved by society? There's the saying that we should contribute more to the world than we take from it. Produce more than you consume. Once you do this, you will be happy. Well, happiness comes from doing hard things. It's hard to produce more than we consume. So why don't we change the incentives? "Show me the incentives and I'll show you the outcome", Charlie Munger once said. Is it really possible to incentivize people to produce more and consume less? Is it possible to incentivize people to do hard things? 

Well, the obvious answer is that these incentives already exist. We need to produce to earn a living wage, to provide for a family, to be able to afford travel, time for our hobbies, stay healthy, etc. But clearly, these incentives are not large enough.

The authoritarian solution might involve taxation. For example, [increasing taxes on cigarettes by 10% has shown to decrease cigarette demand by 4%](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3228562/). What might this look like if we applied it to all areas of consumption? A tax on cigarettes could turn into a tax on obesity, a tax on drugs, a tax on scrolling. For example, let's say a law would come into play that required Apple to submit how many hours a user spent on an app, and users were taxed for each additional minute spent on the app past the allowed limit. Now there's a few problems here, such as the government stalking what we do and deciding which apps to tax, as well as people using these apps as an investment on future production (like educational videos), etc. Despite this, I think this has potential moving forward if it was explored more, but in reality, trusting the government to implement these things is very unlikely.

Is there anything else we can do that doesn't involve the government? AI offers an interesting opportunity here - it dramatically reduces how hard it is to create. Previously, you needed to be extremely specialized to build an app, make a song, create a movie. In the future, it will be significantly easier to create. And remember, people like to do easy things. Enter AI slop. AI slop exists BECAUSE of how easy it is to create, and people hate it. Maybe this hatred will push us off of these platforms, and we will end up creating our own AI Slop. But as Rick Rubin says, "Great creators create for themselves first, not for the audience. When you create to please others, you lose your authentic voice." 
Maybe AI gives us the path into creation instead of consumption.  

The third option is the most drastic - a cultural revolution. A period of time where we move away from the world of bits and into the world of atoms. Not a revolution of opposting technology (although this might be needed when we are close to superintelligence), but one in which we reduce the time we spent online, but embrace our time in nature and are still actively trying to innovate. Peter Theil has been [outspoken](https://www.pcmag.com/news/peter-thiel-weve-seen-innovation-in-bits-but-not-enough-in-atoms) on one of the major missteps of humanity been forgetting the real world and only progressing in the virtual one. However, I'm extremely skeptical of this. Internet technology has become so deeply intertwined in our daily lives, that it's hard to imagine a world that we don't rely on it every day. If there ever was a cultural pushback, I'd assume it would look more like a rebellion than a revolution.

I don't believe in the individual to solve doomscrolling. I certainly don't trust myself. However, one part about today compared to Wallace's time with televisions and remotes is that WE KNOW that this is happening to us. Knowing is the first step to solving the problem. I'm optimistic we will figure it out.